# Gaming the System: Analyzing If Genres Predict a Video Game's Success

The topic of gaming has gained immense popularity in recent years, and video game genres serve as foundational frameworks that can have significant impacts on player experiences and expectations. Exploring whether certain genres generate more demand has always been a subject of interest for game developers, publishers, and stakeholders. Discovering any patterns between specific genres and success would likely have a strong effect on the direction gaming takes in the foreseeable future, as companies would use this information to make decisions regarding budgeting, marketing, and game design. Thus, our group decided it would be useful to analyze how significant of an impact a video game’s genre or genres has on its success.

To conduct this analysis, we collected data on thousands of different video games from the last few decades, along with reviews, ratings, global copies sold, and critic/user scores. These provided good indicators as to whether a game was well-liked and could be considered “successful.” We operationalized success as the positivity of a game’s reviews, the ratings of its critics/users, and its overall number of sales. These factors were determined to be the dependent variables, while the video game genres were seen as the independent variables. With this relationship in mind, we could map the data to draw comparisons between genres and success. Through synthesizing and analyzing the chosen data sets, the following was discovered:

Initially, the results of our ANOVA tests led us to believe that genre did have an impact on a video game's success. However, while some genres showed positive correlations between sentiment scores and acclaim, this didn't always translate to increased sales. This complexity highlights that genre isn't the sole driver of a game's success, emphasizing the need to consider broader factors like marketing tactics and audience trends. While genres influence ratings, their direct impact on sales is less straightforward. This goes against the assumption that games that have been well-received in popular genres before will automatically achieve strong sales. This emphasizes the importance of developers’ consideration of a multitude of factors beyond genre when aiming for commercial success in the gaming industry.

### Final Project for COGS 108 - Data Science in Practice
### Prof. Jason Fleischer for Fall '23 @ UC San Diego
